to double click on the four horsemen just a little bit you 
mentioned what-those four are but do you also want to talk 
a little bit about for each of them-what we know in terms 
of prevention right so if medicine 3.0 prevention is-really 
important you know how do you think about our knowledge of 
those-diseases as it relates to someone who is trying to 
live as long as possible sure-so we'll take them from the 
top so the atherosclerotic diseases um-along with the 
fourth Horsemen which is the metabolic diseases are 
probably the-two that we have the most insight into um as 
far as what are the-pathophysiologic drivers and therefore 
we either theoretically uh or in some-cases practically 
also have I think the best insight into how to prevent them 
so-ascvd is a disease that has both a genetic component and 
an environmental-component but it really doesn't have much 
of a component of luck as far as we-can tell so you know 
stochastic processes involving mutations uh doesn't-seem to 
play a role right there's there's just pure causality from 
the-standpoint of environmental triggers and from 
genetic-inheritance so um both of those factors play 
through three Pathways all of which-are important so first 
is a lipoprotein path pathway second is an 
endothelial-pathway and third is an inflammatory pathway 
but I realized as I'm saying-that it doesn't make a lot of 
sense so I'm going to try to step back and put-this into 
English the three things that have to happen for 
atherosclerotic-disease are as follows the first is a 
molecule called A-lipoprotein which carries cholesterol 
through the body and specifically A-lipoprotein that has an 
apob protein on it because there are lipoproteins 
that-don't have apobs on them and we don't have to worry 
about those but the Lipo-proteins that have apobs on them 
can enter the artery wall when the-endothelium uh is intact 
but they do so more prevalently and more easily when-the 
endothelium is damaged the endothelium is simply the lining 
of-cells on the innermost membrane I mean closest to the 
artery or outermost from-the standpoint of the artery wall 
the one that is most in contact with the-circulation if 
those um apob wrapped lipoproteins get trapped inside 
the-endothelial layer a chemical process known as oxidation 
takes place and that-leads to inflammation what that means 
is the body thinks something is wrong and I-need to fight 
it just as when you get an infection a healthy immune 
system-detects the inflammation caused by the microbial 
agent and it sends the troops-there to get rid of it but in 
this case the insult does not come from an-infection it 
comes from the oxidation of the cholesterol contained 
within the-apob particle as it sits in the endothelium and 
that process initiates a-devastating Cascade of events that 
ultimately can create so much damage in-the wall of the 
artery that it can lead to a rupture of the plaque which is 
the-repairing process the rupture of that plaque acutely 
leads to blood loss and-ultimately oxygen loss to the 
muscles of the heart beyond the point of that-blockage that 
process is known as a heart attack and about 50% of the 
time-it is fatal the first time a person has one-so if you 
want to think about preventing cardiovascular disease es 
schic-cardiovascular disease you have to have an insight 
into all of those things you-have to be thinking about how 
do I have fewer apob particles because the more of-those 
particles you have the more of them that are going to enter 
the-endothelial space the data on this is uh as unambiguous 
as any data are in-medicine from clinical trials 
epidemiologic trials and mandelian-randomization in other 
words you have the only three layers of evidence you-can 
ever look to experimental data Mr and clinical EPI and they 
all say the-same thing there is a log linear reduction 
in-ascvd as apob goes down the second thing you have to do 
is you have to protect-your endothelium so anything that 
aggravates and weakens and makes the-endothelium more 
vulnerable to penetration by apob is problematic and-the 
most common factors that we think are doing that are 
smoking blood-pressure and very likely the metabolic 
conditions that cluster with insulin-resistance 
hyperinsulinemia um and uh type to-diabetes so some 
combination of elevated glucose elevated insulin and 
other-metabolic byproducts such as homocystine uric acid 
all of these things serve to-weaken the endothelium along 
with elevated blood pressure and smoking and-that creates a 
greater susceptibility again it's not surprising that all 
of-those things pose about an equal risk to cardiovascular 
disease as does the-presence of elevated apob and then the 
third piece of the-puzzle and the one for which we really 
don't do much directly in the way of-treatment is the 
higher the inflammation the more likely uh the higher this 
is-going to be and the reason this is probably lesser of 
the three is with-very rare exceptions is it a direct 
therapeutic tool in other words we-clearly therapeutically 
address the first two right we therapeutically lower-apob 
we manage blood pressure we tell people to not smoking you 
know tell-people to not smoke which of course is a therapy 
we you know use exercise and-nutrition to manage metabolic 
health and even pharmacology but directly from 
a-pharmacologic standpoint we don't really manage 
inflammation we can there are a-couple of agents that are 
used somewhat not impressively uh and maybe somewhat-on the 
margins impressively but most of the evidence around 
reducing-inflammation probably comes from doing things much 
more broadly around-nutrition sleep uh and exercise that 
we've talked about elsewhere so in a-nutshell that's really 
what it comes down to and it's for that reason that-I'm 
often making a very bold statement which is even though 
cardiovascular-disease is the leading cause of death um in 
Men in women in the United States but-also in the world um 
it doesn't need to be it really really doesn't need to 
be-and it is a very bizarre tragedy that you know 19 
million people a year still-die from cardiovascular disease 
um given how much we know about what causes it-and how many 
tools we have to prevent it so that's the first you kind 
of-mentioned the first second Horseman there how do you 
think about prevention-for the others which is 
neurogenerative diseases and Cancers yeah so let's 
take-them in order so cancer would be the next most uh uh 
dead-of the of the horsemen and here is one where a lot of 
what I said with respect-to um heart diseas is is actually 
quite different you know in heart disease we-we really have 
a pretty clear sense of what the genetics look like so 
there are-a handful of genetic things like familial hyper 
cholesterolemia which is-a very very heterogeneous 
condition that raises APO lipoprotein uh B uh LP little-a 
which will save for another time we've got lots of content 
on that-um but when it comes to cancer we we know that boy 
there are some really-clear and obvious genetic drivers of 
cancer like there are a handful of genes-some that many 
people have heard of such as braa one or braa 2 which are 
heavily-associated with um breast cancer um or Lynch 
syndrome um which-would be heavily associated with colon 
cancer and other types of cancer but for-the most part part 
when we say that cancer runs in a person's family we-still 
aren't really even able to identify the genes through which 
this is-transmitted it appears to be very polygenic 
furthermore while we know of-at least two significant 
environmental triggers for cancer smoking and obesity-and 
I'll say more about obesity in a second um we actually have 
very little-to say about many other triggers despite what 
people would have you believe um we-have very little 
insight about if at all foods you know specific Foods 
at-isocaloric amount so we can talk about an abundance of 
food because that-factors into the Obesity trigger but if 
we're talking about a bunch of people-eating an isocaloric 
energy balanced diet again despite all of the 
propaganda-around this oh red meat this or soy that or 
whatever there's actually just the-scantest of evidence to 
suggest that any of these are promoting cancer in 
the-slightest way so um when you take all of this together 
what you realize is that-okay smoking is clearly driving 
cancer obesity is clearly driving cancer not-all cancers 
but many cancers about two-thirds of cancers have a very 
strong-tie to obesity I think if you look under the hood of 
that you'll realize it's-probably not the excess fat per se 
or the adiposity that's driving cancer and-rather it's the 
growth factors that are doing it so obesity comes with 
more-inflammation comes with more growth factors such as 
insulin and igf and it-seems more likely that those are the 
things that are actually leading the-increase uh in cancer 
but that leaves a bit of a-vacancy in terms of what else 
explains it and this is where um you know a-scientist like 
Bert vogelstein and others would suggest that look 
there's-actually just a component of really bad luck here 
um you know there are-mutations that occur every Cancer 
begins with a mutation and most of those are-somatic 
mutations that means that most of those are mutations that 
occur in-cells that were developed normally right so these 
are your your germ line the-cells you inherited were normal 
cells but then mutations were Acquired and-mutations fall 
into one of two categories these are either mutations-that 
are tumor promoting so oncogenic mutations or they are 
mutations of tumor-suppression so we have genes that are 
set out to suppress cancer and if you-get a mutation in one 
of those the body loses the ability to suppress cancer 
and-then we get mutation in genes that turn cancer on and 
again a number of these-are inherited but many of them most 
of them are acquired and the what is vexing-us still and 
again I think the best working hypothesis is that um bad 
luck-plays a lot of role in that now you know it would be a 
topic for an entirely-different podcast to look at other 
things that may be triggering those-mutations again in some 
cases we know that viruses play a role in those-mutations 
but where what I'm really talking about is where do the 
majority-of these come from and and anyway that that's an 
area of of huge interest-um and um the other problem with 
cancer that also is not afforded to-cardiovascular disease 
is the treatment options are fewer um or I shouldn't 
say-are fewer I would say are less effective so um a person 
today who has advanced-cardiovascular disease has a much 
better prognosis much better prognosis than a-person today 
who has very Advanced cancer uh a person today with stage 
four-I.E metastatic uh endothelial tumors so that means a 
solid organ tumor like-breast lung pancreas prostate colon 
one of the sort of quote unquote bread and-butter tumors a 
person today who has one of those cancers that has spread 
from-its original site to a distant site that's metastatic 
or stage four cancer-that person has about the same 10year 
survival as a person did with that tumor-50 years ago they 
have a much longer median survival they will live 
longer-they might live for 5 years instead of one year and 
that's nothing to to to-sneeze at um but they're not cured 
at any higher a rate um and and obviously-that's a 
discouraging statistic um so that's um you know as we think 
about-cancer we we obviously think the first and most 
important thing is to do-everything you can to avoid 
getting it but as I alluded to that Playbook is not-as 
thick as the don't get heart disease Playbook um and that 
leads to a very-controversial thing that I talk about which 
is the importance of early and-aggressive screening um and 
again we don't have to go into now we've already-devoted 
tons of content to the arguments for and against that 
approach but-hopefully this explains why um that is that is 
still a position I-hold and so looking at the last of the 
horsemen neurodegenerative disease such-as Alzheimer's um 
something we get asked a lot about a lot how does that look 
in-terms of what you kind of discussed on cancer 
cardiovascular disease as it-relates to prevention well I 
would say it's a little bit in the middle um in-other words 
I think we actually have a slightly better sense of some of 
the-causes uh not not in all cases um but certainly with 
Alzheimer's disease we're-getting a much better sense of 
which people are susceptible what genes play a-role from a 
genetic susceptibility standpoint and genes do play a 
pretty-big role there uh and we also understand the other 
factors and part of the reason-for this Nick is there's a 
very simple but surprisingly accurate adage which-states 
what's good for the heart is good for the brain and study 
after study-after study have demonstrated the following 
every intervention that we-take to lower the risk of 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease-also reduces the 
risk of dementia and that means Alzheimer's disease 
vascular-dementia uh which are the two main ones but 
also-other forms of dementia so that means having better 
metabolic Health having-lower apob having lower blood 
pressure not smoking those things dramatically-reduce your 
risk of cardiovascular disease and they dramatically 
reduce-your risk of Alzheimer's disease now in area where 
dementia has an even bigger-positive impact in intervention 
and cardiovascular disease is with that of-exercise so it's 
no surprise that exercise improves a person's odds of 
not-getting and or surviving cardiovascular disease cancer 
dementia but I would say-that the evidence for the benefits 
of exercise are both greater in magnitude-and greater in um 
confidence when it comes to the prevention 
of-neurodegenerative disease so so um you know it's it's 
interesting-because I do think that many people fear 
dementia more than any other condition-um and there are 
very obvious reasons why that would be the case um and 
it-might be that in our practice we're a bit more 
optimistic than most based on-just the nature of what we do 
and um that you know the types of people that-are in our 
practice meaning like you know people who really study 
prevention-um and and really look at kind of these early 
early signs of dementia and-looking you and look at how you 
know specific interventions can make a-difference um but 
unfortunately um the flip side of that-is that of all the 
chronic diseases um the the dementing uh 
and-neurodegenerative diseases are the ones for which we 
have at this time virtually-no viable therapeutic options 
so the real name of the game with uh narod Deen-diseases 
but specifically the dementing diseases and the only other 
one I'll-really mention here briefly is Parkinson's Disease 
uh because it's the-most prevalent movement disorder is 
that avoiding them is the first second and-third priority 
on a list of three priorities um once we get into 
treatment-land um at least at this point in time it's not 
very promising-um so these are both diseases where having 
as higher Reserve as you can make-a big difference so the 
higher your cognitive reserve and the higher your-movement 
reserve the more resilient you are to the effects of 
these-conditions I think I should just State at the 
conclusion here that you know we-we we shouldn't ignore the 
fourth Horsemen which is of course the the-spectrum of 
metabolic diseases as I said kind of at the outside I mean 
I I think-along with cardiovascular disease we really have 
a pretty clear sense um-mechanistically of what's driving 
this I mean this appears to be primarily a-consequence of 
overnutrition um so energy imbalance is-really the driving 
factor of insulin resistance and insulin resistance 
is-really the driving factor of the downstream effects that 
ultimately lead-to everything from fatty liver disease type 
2 diabetes and again these diseases-in their own right are 
are quite harmful and devastating um but their their 
real-uh danger of them is the effect that they're having on 
the other three-Horsemen where they're increasing your risk 
by you know 25 to 50% so they-really are gasoline on the 
fire of the other diseases-[Music] no
